lists
Modules of Functions
Errors
Data


pyenv tools switch between python 2.7 and python 3

chapter 1
create simple python lists

movies = ["The Holy Grail", "The Life of Brain", "The Meaning of Life"]

(string, comma, square brackets, assign)

Python variable identifiters don't have a type
Identifiers are simply names that refer to a data object of some type.

Lists are like arrays:
when you create a list in python, the interpreter creates an array-like data
structure in memory to hold your data, with your data items stacked from the
bottom up. the first slot in the stack is numbered 0.

movies[1]   access list data using the square bracket notation

len(cast) return the length of a list

listname.append("new element")
listname.pop()
listname.extend(["",""])
listname.remove("")
listname.insert(0, "")

listname.insert(1, 1975)   insert year

Iterate:
for each_item in lists:
    print(each_item)

count = 0
while count < len(movies):
    print(movies[count])
    count = count + 1

you can use single quotes or double quotes with string
escape \"

Names can start with a letter character or an underscore, then include any
number of letter characters, numbers, and/or underscores in the rest of the
name. Strange characters (such as %$) are not allowed and you'll obviously want
to use names that have meaning within the context of your code.

python is case sensitive

Store lists within lists
Lists can hold data of mixed type.

Check a list for a list:
Each time you process an item in your list, you need to check to see if the
item is another list.
isinstance() lets you check if a specific identifier holds data of a specific
type.

names = ['michael', 'terry']
isinstance(names, list)   true

nums_names = len(names)
isinstance(num_names, list)   false

dir(__builtins__) to see a list of the build-in stuff that comes with python.

help(input)
help(isinstance)


Don't repeat code; create a function
def -- providing a name for your function and specifying either an empty or
populated argument list within parentheses. 

def function_name (arguments):
    function code suite

Recursion to the rescure!


Chapter 2 Modules of functions
Reusable code is great, but a shareable module is better.
how to create, install, and distribute your own shareable modules.

Modules let you orgnize your code for optimal sharing
The distribution utilites let you share your modules with the world

Turn your function into a module
A module is simply a text file that contains Python code. The main reuirement
is that the name of the file needs to end in .py: the Python extension. To turn
your function into a module, save your code into an appropriately named file:

Go ahead and create a text file called nester.py that contains your function
code from the end of chapter 1.

The Python Package Index (or PyPI for short) provides a centralized repository
for third-party Python modules on the Internet. When you are ready, you'll be
PyPI to publish your module and make your code available for use by others. And
your module is ready, but for one important addition.

Comment your code
"""
comment
"""
the triple quote for multiple-line comments.

# for one line comment

import sys
sys.path()

impirt nester
or from nester import print_lol
namespace different

